- For two seasons,
America's
most talented bladesmiths
have faced off
in the ultimate competition...
- Getting pretty hot
in the kitchen.
- Making some of history's
deadliest weapons.
Now, with the stakes
higher than ever,
a new batch of bladesmiths
enter the Forge
to test their skills.
- Whoa, whoa,
watch out, watch out, watch out.
- Only one will take home
$10,000...
- Whoo!
- And be crowned
"Forged in Fire" champion.
[dramatic music]
♪ ♪
- My name is David Mooneyham.
I'm from Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma.
I've been a hobby bladesmith
for about 15 years now.
I work for a large computer
manufacturer.
The daytime job
just pays the bills,
allows me to spend money
on the bladesmithing.
- My name's Jason.
I'm from Brazoria, Texas,
and I'm 53 years old.
I've been bladesmithing
for 18 years.
My wife and I live on
21 acres.
We've got a 1-acre pond
stocked with catfish.
It's a nice place to live.
- My name is Nic Hanlon,
I'm 28 years old,
and I've been bladesmithing
for about 14 years.
As a person,
I'm super laid back.
Just always trying to crack
some lame joke.
Why did the anvil
get sent to AA?
'Cause it was always
getting hammered.
- My name is Todd Bitler,
and I'm from a super small town
in Ohio called Amanda.
I am a full-time bladesmith.
The feeling of creating
something
that will be passed down--
super cool.
- Gentlemen,
welcome to the Forge.
You're here to engage
in three rounds
of edged-weapon-making
competition designed
to push your blade-making skills
to the limit,
from design to forge
to fit and finish.
Of course,
at the end of each round,
you'll be presenting
your work
to our panel
of expert judges.
First up, master bladesmith
Jason Knight.
Historic weapons re-creation
specialist David Baker.
And last, Kali martial artist
Doug Marcaida.
Ultimately, they decide
which of you
will be the "Forged in Fire"
champion,
who also leaves here
with that check for 10 grand.
In this first round
of competition
you'll be making
your weapons from...
these weapons.
.50-caliber
black powder rifles.
- This is crazy.
I would have never thought
of trying to make a knife
out of a rifle.
- This first round
of competition,
you'll have to forge
your weapons using steel
harvested from these.
But keep in mind that
in the second round,
you'll be attaching handles
to your blades
to turn them into
fully functional weapons.
Your finished weapons
will then be tested
for strength and durability
in a boot chop,
for sharpness
in a fire hose slice.
You will have ten minutes
to work on your design.
You'll have three hours
to forge your blades.
Gentlemen, I remind you,
at the end of this round,
one of you will
have to surrender his weapon
and leave the Forge.
Your ten-minute design window
starts...now.
- The hardest part
about this challenge
is, how do I make
a usable piece of steel
out of this insane material?
- It's cool to be able to see
that you're making a weapon
out of a weapon.
- Wow.
I'm just gonna stick
with what I know,
which are traditional bowies.
I want a full-tang design.
It'll be a slicer.
- I'm planning to make
a recurve camp knife.
A very basic blade shape,
a little heavy
out toward the end.
I really think it's going
to excel
at the tests
they're gonna put it through.
- Don't look down the barrel
of a gun, kids.
I'm gog to make a hybridized
fantasy bowie knife.
It's gonna have
a nice, sweeping curve.
Just something that will chop
a fire hose and a leather boot.
- I'm gonna make
a D-guard bowie.
A really neat guard,
very strong, awesome blade.
It's just an all-out weapon.
- Five, four, three,
two, one.
Bladesmiths, your ten-minute
design period is closed.
Your three-hour forging time
starts...now.
- Yee-haw.
♪ ♪
- That octagon barrel
is gonna be tricky.
Okay.
I'm gonna get a grinder
and split the top of the barrel.
Ah!
Damn it.
- Whoo.
Flying grinder.
- It's a madhouse here.
That was not good.
Totally not good.
I split it,
get my barrel in the forge
so I can open it up.
It's difficult
spreading this barrel apart.
Oh!
- That's smart.
- Yeah.
- Using the horn of the anvil...
- Good, good. Yeah.
- To get that metal split,
opened up,
so you can flatten it out.
- That band saw is making
quick work of that gun steel.
- I know guns.
I build guns.
I know that that barrel
probably doesn't have
any carbon whatsoever.
That way when the shot goes off,
they don't break.
I see the blade done
before I start.
I know where I'm going,
where I'm headed,
and what ultimately
I'm going to wind up with.
♪ ♪
- A gun to a knife
just blew my mind.
There's so much going on;
I'm trying to focus.
I'm super ADD.
- Nic is struggling
really badly with his barrel,
just getting it
to open up.
- If my autobiography
is called anything,
it'd probably be
"Learning How To Focus 101."
- In this corner, weighing in
at 230 pounds, is David.
- All right,
let's make it happen.
I got the piece I wanted
cut out.
Snag an angle grinder.
Let's do it.
Huzzah!
I take it,
I put it in the forge.
and it's taking forever
to get hot.
Hurry, hurry, hurry.
[grunts]
[bleep].
Ah, son of a bitch.
Well, I tried to unroll it.
This little bit on the edge
rolled over on me.
So that's gonna create
a cold shut.
What the hell? What the hell?
What the hell?
Oh, how am I gonna fix that?
Not a good start.
Damn it!
- One hour has elapsed.
You have only two hours
remaining to finish your work.
- Two more hours, Nic.
- Nic is really,
really struggling
to flatten out
this barrel.
- I'm falling behind
because I've never made
a round, hollow pipe
into a blade.
[fast-paced music]
I've always been just kind of
a little odd duck,
you know,
I just do my own thing.
♪ ♪
I wasn't quite strong enough
to use the hammer that I had.
It snapped to me.
It's like, "Duh.
There's a power hammer
right there."
I've never used
a power hammer before.
I put my foot into it
and just watched
that hammerhead swat
and just really flatten
that piece.
And it was like a weight
was lifted off my shoulders.
It's so much work
that I don't have to do.
And I finally feel like
I'm catching up.
- [whistling]
- You know, it's gonna be
interesting to watch
Todd's design with an integral
D-guard built in.
That's only the second time
we've had that done
in this show.
- I'm a Virgo,
which, they're perfectionists.
Whoo, Mommy.
What makes me unique
is my thought process.
I think outside the box.
By cutting out my knife
with a grinder,
I can do it much quicker.
I'm angle grinding on the floor
so I can get good balance.
And people look at me
and go...
♪ ♪
- What is with the litter box
of sand?
- He's got a cat
in that bag.
- I brought sand
to the Forge today
to normalize my blade.
Quenching in the oil
can fracture a blade
really quickly.
If you normalize it,
you don't have to worry
about that kind of stuff.
- Now, there's a lot of ways
to normalize.
I've never seen that.
It just will take longer.
♪ ♪
- It's really not going
as planned.
I've actually got a wrinkle
down this whole blade right now.
Horrible.
I mean, that shape
wants to be round,
and I want it to be flat.
So to make it flat,
you'd put the pressure here;
it's gonna do something
that you really don't want to
somewhere else.
It may be a deal breaker.
I may be going home.
- Bladesmiths, you have only
one hour remaining
to finish your work.
- I'm really having a hard time
with the clock.
I feel like
I've just started.
Whoo.
It's flat,
but you know what?
That's an awfully thin spot.
♪ ♪
The hell?
Screw it.
I'm gonna flatten it out.
I'm gonna grind
that thin spot off.
It'll look a bit more
like a kukri.
This is not the blade
that I set out to make.
Look at the beauty
that is the kukri.
The completely unintentional
kukri.
A kukri can be really thin
at the back of the blade.
This is a huge gamble because
the simple recurve camp knife
is easy to make.
A kukri, on the other hand,
there are some design elements
that just don't look right
if you screw them up.
♪ ♪
- I fell behind.
I did have a crack
on the end.
I forged it out.
I'm hoping it doesn't
show back up.
I've got less
than an hour left.
I'm committed to heat-treat
this thing.
♪ ♪
[bleep].
Pulled the blade out
of the quench,
and it's got just a little bit
of a warpage in it,
but it's still warm enough
that I can move it around
a little bit.
So I chucked it up
in the leg vise
and just put a little bit
of pressure
just to try to keep it
straightened up.
- Put it in the vice.
both: Let it cool.
- Don't you pour water
on that blade.
- Oh, please don't do that.
- Don't you do that.
- He's gonna break it.
- Oh, boy.
- Don't do it.
all: Oh!
[dramatic music]
- I felt good
about the quench.
It's got just a little bit
of a warpage in it,
and so I chucked it up
in the leg vise
and just put a little bit
of pressure
just to try to keep it
straightened up.
- Don't you pour water
on that blade.
- Oh, please don't do that.
- Oh, boy.
- Don't do it.
- No, no, no, no.
- Gonna do it.
- No, no.
[suspenseful music]
- Okay, good.
- Oh, he's gonna just drink it.
♪ ♪
both: Oh, no!
- You're gonna spit water on it!
- It's not a good idea
because it could easily crack.
- I got the warp out of it.
I've still got some big divots
I need to take out.
I feel like there's
a little bit of light
at the end of this tunnel.
- I need to quench my blade.
I had a thin tip,
and it was really hard
to get enough heat
without burning the tip
off of the blade.
♪ ♪
- Both hands, no gloves.
Not a good idea.
- French fries, anybody?
- When I quenched it
and it didn't skate,
it cut the blade;
it was a little bit concerning
'cause I knew it would take
more than one quench.
- So, Todd, once again
quenching in a tilted barrel.
- With a, um--
- With a burlap sack.
- Possibly the most flammable
material ever.
- See if we got any oil
this time.
There we go.
- Bladesmiths, you have
just 30 minutes remaining
to finish your work.
- Every quench
your heart just races.
It's enough to make anybody
religious.
[fast-paced music]
I am very happy
with my quench.
It just--no problems.
My inner voice is going,
"Oh, my God. It worked."
♪ ♪
- Nic over on the 72-inch
belt sander already.
For the guy who started out
the slowest,
he's really come a long way
and is maybe a front runner
in this competition.
- It's not looking exactly
like I wanted it to,
but adapt and overcome.
I'm grinding away; where
the barrel had kinda folded over
on itself,
it looks like a crack.
[bleep].
And I'm trying to grind
that out.
I'm very nervous.
- All right,
I know what it looks like now.
I'm feeling really good.
I've almost got got blade.
It looks ready to heat-treat.
Oh, yeah,
make a good mess.
A differential heat-treat
is always a good thing,
so I grab a bucket
of furnace cement.
David declares that
good enough.
I'm gonna go really thick
with this crap.
- There's another quench.
- All right.
- [coughing]
Be hard.
It tests hard.
I might have a knife.
- You're seeing the evolution
of techniques right here.
You got 72-inch belt grinder,
angle grinder,
hand filing,
72-inch belt grinder.
- Oh, yeah.
- Ten, nine,
eight, seven, six,
five, four, three,
two, one!
Shut down your machines,
drop your tools!
Your forging time
has ended!
- Yeah!
- Place your blades
on top of your anvils.
- I'm excited, I'm scared.
It's just this mélange
of feelings.
- Bladesmiths, it's time
for the judges
to look at your work.
Todd, you're up first.
Please present your blade
to the judges.
- It's a nice design.
Feels good.
Looks like a slasher.
- It's got
a good shape to it.
There's a couple of little
nicks along your spine.
I would worry that that can
crack right there
or that will travel back
in any cutting.
Hopefully that won't
be an issue.
- Nic, you're up.
- I do like your shape.
You know, you got it
nice and straight.
You actually got that fold
running all the way the length,
as well as this one
on the bottom,
but I do like hollow grind.
Nicely done.
- Thank you.
- Jason, you're up.
Please present your blade
to the judges.
- Your grinding is nicely done
on this.
- Yeah, you have this
one cold shut right here,
but fortunately,
it's located in the handle.
- David, you're up.
- I like the way that
you adjusted the design
from a camp knife
to a kukri.
Off the bat,
you can already tell
where the blade wants to go.
It just wants to fall forward.
It just goes,
"Let me chop."
- So you pulled off something
that I'm impressed with
because you took
that little bit of metal,
and you stretched it out
very wide.
But you did make it
kinda thin.
- Gentlemen, the judges will now
take some time to decide
which of you moves on
to the next round.
So I'm going to ask you
to step off the Forge floor.
Thank you.
♪ ♪
- I am so glad
when this is done.
- Mm-hmm.
- How did yours turn out?
- Really good.
I'm happy with mine.
- You guys are so much
farther along than me.
I think they're gonna
send me home for that.
- All right, judges,
time to take a closer look.
We'll start
with Todd's blade on the end.
- I don't see why this blade
wouldn't cut,
but the foundation
is terrible.
These little sharp angles
in here from the saw
are--they're really bad
stress risers.
He could fix that, but it's
going to make his blade shorter.
- Let's move on
to Nic's blade.
- Whew, uh, there's a lot
going on with Nic's blade.
This big fold down here,
cold shut.
He hasn't ground
into the back of it,
but he's got cracks
moving into it.
There's at least two
that I can see.
- Nic was on the grinder
a long time,
and he didn't address
all these issues.
So, you know, unfortunately,
it's the least finished
of all the blades.
- Let's move on
to Jason's blade.
- Out of all these,
this is probably
the best ground knife,
considering there are some
scratches in there.
- I really wish I was in there
just listening to what
they were saying about it.
- I wish I could hear them.
Yeah.
- He does have
some problems up here.
He's got some--look like
quench cracks maybe.
What do you think, Dave?
- It doesn't go
all the way through.
- You don't see it
on the other side.
- It's kind of
a lightning crack.
It's not a clean crack,
so, you know,
it's a question of what's going
on with that blade.
- Okay.
Let's move on to David's blade.
- I think his profile's
fantastic.
There's a cold shut
in the back here
that's left a couple
little marks here,
but they're not cracks.
- Okay.
All right, gentlemen,
I need to know.
Doug, have you made
a final decision?
- Yes, I have.
- Dave?
- Yeah, close, but, yeah.
- Jason?
- I sure have.
- All right,
let's go tell our smiths.
♪ ♪
Bladesmiths, welcome back.
The judges have examined
your work,
and they've made
a final decision.
It's time for one of you
to leave the Forge.
♪ ♪
Nic, your blade
did not make the cut.
- Nic, we all agree
that the design you came up with
has a lot to offer,
but the positioning
of those cold shuts in the blade
and the cracks along the tip
of that blade, well,
the combination is putting
the structural integrity
of your blade in question.
That's why we've got
to let you go.
- I understand.
- Nic, please surrender
your weapon.
- My blade
just had too many faults.
What an experience.
I'm gonna tell this story
for years to come.
First thing I do
when I get home,
I'm gonna take a shower,
I'm gonna love
on my corgies,
just keep forging and enjoy
everything that I have.
♪ ♪
- Bladesmiths,
congratulations.
Now it's time
for the next phase.
In this round of competition,
you'll be placing handles
on your blades,
turning them into
fully functional weapons.
You will have three hours
in this round.
Keep in mind that
when the time runs out,
and your weapons
have been tested,
one of you will have
to surrender his weapon
and leave the Forge.
Oh, and one more thing.
In keeping with our theme,
you'll have to include
at least one visible element
from those black powder rifles
into your handle's
overall construction.
- I thought the gun
was done with.
I want this gun to die
in a fire.
It needs to go away.
- Good luck.
Your three-hour time
starts...now.
♪ ♪
- And the clock is running.
- What elements of that rifle
would you be looking for?
- Personally,
I'd probably use the stock,
maybe add some of those
brass accents into it
in some kind of way.
- The other contestants
are gonna be
working on their handles;
I'm gonna be grinding my blade.
I have so much grinding
to do.
- David, he's got a ways to go
on that grinding.
- He's got a profile, but no
bevel to his blade at all.
- It's just gonna be
a grinding marathon.
- As soon as he said I had to
use something of the gun,
I knew what I was gonna use.
I plan on using the butt plate
from the gun,
which is the biggest piece
of brass,
to do the brass ferrules.
- It looks like he's just
accenting
that little brass fitting.
- Maybe.
Maybe he's tapping out
Morse code.
- I want my blade
to look old.
I don't want something
shiny and bright and new.
The handle I'm going to make
is wood.
Most of the D-guard bowies
were made out of wood.
I'm going to use
Osage orange.
It's a western wood.
- That blade is hanging
by a thread,
so whatever he is doing,
he better do it well.
♪ ♪
- All right,
what to do, what to do.
- So it looks like Jason
is disassembling
from the stock
of that weapon.
- Plan is to use the plate
like an escutcheon plate.
See if I can incorporate it
into the handle material.
I hope the judges see
that I'm stretching myself.
- So apparently Jason's using
the drill press to kind of...
- Yes, perfect.
- Cut out an inlay pattern.
- Basically he's created
a router.
- Bladesmiths,
one hour has elapsed.
You have two hours remaining
to finish your work.
David over here,
still working on his blade.
- Because of the unique shape
of the kukri,
it is hard to grind evenly.
- Really gotta hurry up
and get off this grinder,
put a freaking handle
on this thing.
This is probably the ugliest
thing I have ever made,
but hopefully it'll give
that boot hell.
[chuckles]
♪ ♪
- Todd's pace has really
picked up.
His handle has a brass ferrule
around the top.
- One of the things that I
really think is cool about Todd
is his performance-oriented
grinding style.
It's like public art.
- When people see me work,
that are like,
"You are a maniac."
- He doesn't like vises at all.
- No.
- The guy likes to take a knee.
- I'm thinking,
what's my next move?
I never look back,
I look forward.
Totally in motion.
♪ ♪
- David has finally decided
it might be time
to put a handle on his blade.
- That is a good idea.
- There's nothing
on that gun
that I want to make a handle
out of.
So I'm just gonna cut
the stock up
and see if I can make
some slabs out of it.
I'm cutting
these shapes out,
and I go to match these up
to see what my thicknesses
are gonna look like.
I cut two
of the same side out.
Oh, this is a special kind
of stupid.
I've wasted all my gunstock
handle material.
I'm gutted.
What the hell
am I gonna do?
[dramatic music]
- Oh, this is a special kind
of stupid.
I've wasted
all of my material.
I'm gutted. I have no idea
what I'm gonna do.
Hey, Jason,
you using your stock?
I cut two of the same side.
- [laughing]
- I'm a genius.
- I do not mind you
using my stock.
- You are awesome.
♪ ♪
You're special, David,
you're special.
- The handle that I'm going
to make is a D-guard handle.
- I will say this about Todd:
he's not playing it safe.
And that's what I like.
- No, he's not.
♪ ♪
- Making this handle by hand
is self-rewarding.
I don't rely on machines.
- All of his work
coming out of that forge
was hammer and anvil,
so that's pretty impressive.
He's got that integral D-guard,
the compression fits.
We've never had anybody
do a multi-piece construction
like that.
You have just one hour
remaining to finish your work.
- Oh, it's only time, right?
- This is the time that
I need to get busy finishing.
I'm finally putting it
together.
I guess time is the big thing.
It's gonna be tight.
- Jason has actually done some
really interesting inlay work.
That's amazing.
- I think it's brilliant.
He'll have a piece
that'll be very, very visible,
but it'll be out of the way.
- Bladesmiths, you have only
30 minutes remaining.
- Saying "no" will not
slow the clock down.
- [chuckles]
- So I'm really concerned
about Dave's blade.
He still hasn't shaped
that handle.
- Yeah, he's got a lot
of work to do
and a little bit of time
to do it in.
- I have to keep doing it.
I'm not gonna give up.
I've got to get this done.
- Work more fastlier.
- Yeah, fastlier.
- Come on, come on, come on.
♪ ♪
- This is getting down to it.
- Ten, nine, eight,
seven, six, five,
four, three, two, one.
Drop your tools,
stop your work.
Please return to your anvils
with your blades, thank you.
- So time's up.
It's over.
[groans]
I have a knife...maybe.
- A bladesmith is probably
his worst critic,
but given the time,
I am satisfied with the job
I could do.
- Bladesmiths,
this is the strength test.
I'm going to be testing
the strength
and durability
of your blades
by chopping into
these boots.
If the knives can cut through
the leather without damage,
it shows how strong
the edge is.
David, are you ready?
- Tear it up.
- All right.
- This is gonna be so cool.
I'm really curious to see
what my blade does to the boot.
They are going to be trying
to cut the toe off.
[suspenseful music]
I can't see anything.
It made
a very satisfying whack,
but it didn't cut
the boot.
At least the blade
didn't break.
- David, one thing I like
about your knife,
it's very light and fast.
Kinda makes me want
to chop through the jungle,
but on the boot,
you didn't do bad.
I don't see
any edge damage.
I don't have any wrinkles
or fold-overs.
Overall, good job.
- Awesome, thank you.
- Jason, you ready?
- Yes, sir.
[suspenseful music]
♪ ♪
- A little bit disappointed
on the inside.
Barely nicked it.
- Well, Jason, your knife handle
is very blocky to me.
It's hard to manage it and also
focus on hitting something.
Overall, it held up.
- Thank you, sir.
- Got a little bit of a cut
in the boot.
Well done.
- Thank you.
- Todd, you ready?
- Do it.
[suspenseful music]
♪ ♪
- Nice.
Wow.
♪ ♪
- Todd, I notice your knife
has developed
a very interesting patina.
- As well as my hand.
[laughter]
- I was a little concerned
because your tang was very...
- Yeah, yeah.
- Small there so,
but I liked that you pulled off
the D-guard.
- Thank you.
- Overall, I'm impressed.
You put a ferrule on it.
It looks like something
that came right off
of a pirate ship to me.
You did good.
- Thank you. Thank you.
- Next up
is the sharpness test.
Doug?
- Bladesmiths, to see how sharp
the edge of your blade is,
I will take your weapon
and will attempt to cut through
these fire hoses.
Let's see how well
your blades perform.
Dave, you're up first.
Are you ready?
- Absolutely.
- Let's do this.
- I am so nervous right now.
Fire hose is made to be
abrasion resistant,
so it may just turn the blade,
for all I know.
[suspenseful music]
[bleep].
[dramatic music]
- I am so nervous right now.
Fire hose is made to be
abrasion resistant,
so it may just turn the blade,
for all I know.
[suspenseful music]
[bleep].
- Well, Dave, you've got a belly
on your blade,
enough to want to pull in
and slice,
but still running
across the edge
was not sharp enough
to cut all the way through.
But it did lacerate
the hose.
The handle construction--
a little bit long,
but, you know,
it is comfortable.
Jason, you're next.
You ready?
- I'm ready.
[suspenseful music]
♪ ♪
- Good job.
- Thanks.
- Really good job.
- Jason, you have
a very sharp knife,
and it almost cut
all the way through.
The handle--
I like the flaring there.
That prevents it from wanting
to slip out of it,
but it is
a little blocky.
Overall, it will cut.
- Thank you.
- Good job.
Todd, you're up next.
You ready?
- Ready to go.
- Let's do this.
[suspenseful music]
♪ ♪
[laughter]
First off, Todd, let's talk
about your D-guard
and your handle construction
here.
It feels good.
With a D-guard,
you almost feel like
close-quarter fighting,
just punch with it,
because it's so close
to the hand
and a shorter blade.
Your blade is sharp enough
to lacerate all the way
through the back of the hose.
It didn't cut
all the way through,
but nonetheless,
this, sir, will cut.
Good job.
- Thank you.
- The judges have discussed
the details of your blades,
and it's time for one of you
to leave the Forge.
[suspenseful music]
Jason, your blade
did not make the cut.
- Jason, I really appreciate
what you did
with the inlay
in your handle,
but that inlay didn't really
allow you
to contour that handle much,
and it wound up being blocky.
Between that and that crack
at the tip of the blade,
which is getting larger,
well, those two things
are the reasons
we're letting you go.
- Jason, please surrender
your weapon.
- I would have liked
to have moved on.
I look back now,
and I probably should have
done things a little bit
different.
I did the best I can.
I miss my wife,
I'm ready to get home to her.
Maybe jump on the motorcycle,
go for a ride.
It was a great experience.
It's one I'll never forget.
And I appreciate
the opportunity.
- David, Todd,
congratulations.
Your work has advanced you
into this final round
of competition.
Now we're sending you
back to your home forges
to re-create an iconic blade
from history.
That weapon is...
[suspenseful music]
The cavalry saber.
♪ ♪
The cavalry saber emerged in
Europe around the 18th century.
With new developments
in battlefield tactics,
cavalry soldiers
didn't have time
for fancy swordplay
or thrusts.
The cavalry saber allowed
mounted soldiers
to attack with a deadly
overhand slash.
It wasn't just the curve
of the weapon
that made it
a dangerous chopper.
The tip of the blade
was thicker than the hilt,
adding more power
to the swing.
The sword has become one
of the more iconic weapons
of its time and was used by
Captain Jack Aubrey
in the film
"Master and Commander."
Though lethal enough to cut off
an arm with a single swing,
the advent of gunpowder
saw the cavalry saber
relegated to
ceremonial purposes.
- That's right up my alley.
As soon as he pulled
the sheet off,
I knew what
I was gonna make already.
- You'll have five days
at your home forge
to complete this project,
so show us something
unique
that only you could make.
- Well, I tell you,
if I can make a kukri
out of a gun barrel,
then making a saber
shouldn't be a big problem.
- You must include
a 2- to 3-inch
curve in the blade
and a D or stirrup guard
over the handle.
At the end of those five days,
you will return
and present your sabers
to our panel of judges.
Only after they've put
your weapons
through a series
of rigorous tests,
will they declare one of you
the "Forged in Fire" champion.
Good luck, bladesmiths.
We'll see you in five days.
- Yeah.
- Let's do this.
[upbeat music]
- I'm back at my forge,
happy to be home.
My design will actually be
off an original.
The blade will have
a fair amount of curvature.
It'll be beautiful
and functional.
I used coal my whole life.
That's how I started out.
Everybody complains
about coal.
"Oh, it's hard.
Oh, I can't keep the fire hot."
They just don't know
what they're doing.
♪ ♪
Now here's where
you gotta watch.
You don't want to overheat--
whoop--your metal.
I make my blades
the old way.
I forge them by hand.
I use all hand tools.
It takes me
a little bit longer,
but it shows
in the finished product.
It's not really cheap;
it's learning how to do things,
and I'm a kind of guy
that wouldn't pay a penny
to see a pissant eat a bale
of hay on Sunday.
So I can fabricate
just about anything.
I can do custom cars,
bikes, rehab houses.
So, they're wanting a sword,
they're gonna get a sword.
♪ ♪
[upbeat music]
- And away we go.
We're here in Oklahoma City
in my home shop.
Behold the mess.
My shop is just
very bare bones.
I've got hammers, fire,
and a grinder.
No turning back now.
My experience with swords
is mostly fantasy blades,
like katanas, a pirate cutlass,
that sort of thing,
so I've never tried
to forge a blade that large
and never all in
one forging session.
This is where that power hammer
would come in real handy.
Every heat, it's inducing a
little curve or a little twist.
It's just such a long blade.
I correct one little warp
or one little bend,
there's another one beside it
that gets a little worse.
[groans]
I'm heating,
I'm hammering.
I'm heating, I'm hammering
and hammering
and hammering.
This thing is a monster
of a blade.
[exhales deeply]
♪ ♪
- Day two,
and I'm feeling good.
I really want to make
this blade superb,
so I pound the edge in.
Takes me a little bit longer,
but it's worth the time.
See that edge on that?
I'm basically
right down to sharp.
Best-case scenario is, tomorrow
I get this blade quenched
and start on the guard
and the handles,
and see what I got.
[blows]
Uh-oh.
[bleep].
I just burned it out.
The thing with coal
is, one crank too many,
it just crumbles.
The blade is junk.
The could be
just the ruination right there.
[dramatic music]
- I'm cranking the forge,
I pull the blade out...
[blows]
Uh-oh.
And I see the burnout.
[bleep].
The thing with coal
is, you cannot see the color,
and you're trying to guess
what the heat is.
And just a half a crank
could burn it up.
The blade is junk.
Um...
[bleep].
I'm kinda PO'ed.
I just spent almost two days
making this blade,
but when the going
gets tough,
the tough get going.
I'm gonna start another blade.
[upbeat music]
- Finally, I'm done
with all the rough forging.
About ready to heat-treat.
This sword is a beast,
it really is.
If this quench goes poorly
and I have to start over,
it really could jeopardize
my ability
to turn in a finished blade.
Hold on to your butts.
♪ ♪
[suspenseful music]
This baby's hard
like trigonometry.
Look at it.
Spring!
I'm gonna go ahead and take some
of these warps out with a torch
and move on to grinding.
[pings]
[bleep].
Every bladesmith
knows this sound.
It's the dreaded ping
of death.
Man, I really don't like
that sound.
I forgot that when you
dip it in water,
built a bunch of stress...
[pings]
Son of a bitch.
Caused it to crack.
Can't even explain how
disappointed I am right now.
Half the time is gone,
and I gotta start over
completely.
- Yesterday,
I made another blade,
so I'm gonna really move
on this thing.
I got less than two days
to make this handle great.
The handle's gonna be made
out of burled walnut.
It'll be filed in a spiral,
so your fingers feel
really comfortable.
I'm using my secret
magic potion.
Makes it look 200 years old.
Fine details really show up
in the end,
so it's tedious,
it takes a lot of time,
but I think my skills show that
I'm ready for any challenge.
[grunts]
Yep, she's sharp.
Just keep on going.
- Last day,
and I'm quenching a new blade.
If I don't get this right
the first time,
I won't have enough time
to finish it.
[suspenseful music]
Well, no pings.
Slap a handle on it
and call it good.
♪ ♪
I have no idea how
I'm gonna finish this handle.
I think I'm just gonna go
as fast as I can,
but this D-guard
is completely new to me.
I'm just gonna have
to make it up as I go along.
Worst-case scenario,
I just make something ugly.
Hmm.
Seriously no bueno here.
♪ ♪
Go, damn it.
Be a handle.
♪ ♪
Not a piece of art,
but it's an instrument
of destruction.
♪ ♪
- Welcome back, bladesmiths.
We have some difficult
challenges
for your blades today,
but before we get into that,
David, how did it go
at the home forge?
- I had issues with the time.
My first blade went great--
went to correct a bend,
broke it,
had to start over.
Considering what all
went wrong,
I'm happy with the way
it turned out.
- Great.
Todd, how did it go
for you at your home forge?
- I had a little bit
of difficulty.
I use a coal forge,
and when you use a coal forge,
you can't really
see the blade,
and it burnt a couple places,
so I had to make another blade
and it came out great.
- All right, well,
we're gonna find out
because we're about to put
your weapons
through a series of tests.
Up first is the sharpness test.
Dave?
- The cavalry saber was a weapon
that dominated
the battlefields of Europe
for almost 200 years.
So to test the sharpness
of your blades,
I'm gonna take three cuts
against our bag here.
Now, Dave, you're up first.
Are you ready?
- Let's do it.
I finally get to see
somebody use this thing.
I am just so excited
to see what happens.
[suspenseful music]
♪ ♪
- Went about 3/4 of the way
through.
The curvature
of your weapon
and the fact that it is
as sharp as it is
really did a nice job
on that.
Interesting-shaped guard,
but to quote
a friend of mine,
this will cut.
All right, Todd, you're up.
Are you ready?
- Yes, sir, I'm ready.
Dave's sword slashes the bag,
so I'm feeling
a little anxious.
We'll see what happens.
[suspenseful music]
♪ ♪
- All right, Todd,
right off the bat,
I got a bit of a loose handle
right there.
You can see that it
cut the bag nicely.
It is sharp,
and it will cut.
So well done on that.
Next up
is our kill test.
And for that,
I'll throw you over to Doug.
- Bladesmiths, to see what kind
of lethal damage
your saber can do,
I will take your sword
and deliver multiple strikes
on the ballistics dummy.
Dave, you're up first.
Are you ready?
- Let's kill that dummy.
- Let's do it.
[suspenseful music]
♪ ♪
- Dave,
your blade is razor sharp.
On the initial slash,
you can see
how much it lacerated through.
Second one made it all the way
into the bone,
and even on the thrust, with
the way your blade is angled,
you can lacerate and gut
everything that's in there.
This, sir, will kill.
Good job.
- Awesome, thank you.
- Todd, you're up next.
Are you ready?
- Yep.
- Let's do this.
[suspenseful music]
♪ ♪
Okay, Todd, on the horizontal
slash with the movement,
it dug in nicely.
You've got a good configuration
with your blade here.
This weapon will kill.
- Awesome.
- Good job.
- Thank you.
- Next up
is the strength test.
For that,
I'll throw you over to Dave.
- Gentlemen,
to test the edge of your blade,
we're gonna take your swords,
clamp them in a vise
and fire a bullet at them.
- Awesome.
- Dave, you're up.
- What it takes to pass
a bullet test
is, basically,
you just can't be over-hard.
If you're over-hard,
you'll chip out or you'll break.
This is intense.
- Three, two, one.
Fire.
[gunshot]
[dramatic music]
- Gentlemen,
to test the edge of your blade,
we're gonna take your swords,
clamp them in a vise,
and fire a bullet at them.
- Awesome.
- Dave, you're up.
- Tear it up.
- All right, guys.
Three, two, one.
Fire.
[gunshot]
- Yep, split it.
- I'm just super relieved
when I see those three holes
appear in the backdrop.
- Dave, you can actually see
the two points
where the hollow-point bullet
hit this blade.
Other than that small deflection
right there,
blade's held up nicely.
- Sweet.
- All right, Todd.
Are you ready for this?
- Yes, sir.
Now, I'm pretty confident
the edge will hold up.
I pre-tested it,
so we'll just wait and see
what the bullet does.
- All right, gentlemen.
In three, two, one.
Fire.
[gunshot]
Oh, yeah.
That split.
[gunshot]
♪ ♪
So that bullet split nicely
on your sword.
There's a little bit
of edge deflection
but very little.
Still straight.
Hardly affected the edge
at all.
Nicely done.
- Thank you.
- All right, bladesmiths,
our weapons tests
are now complete.
From here, we'll reconvene
back at the Forge
where the judges will make
a final decision
about which one of you will be
"Forged in Fire" champion
and leave with that check
for 10 grand.
Thank you.
Dave, Todd, the judges
have made their final decision.
But before that, they have
feedback for both of you.
Jason.
- David,
what I really appreciated
about yours
was its ability to nearly slice
through that bag.
Incredibly sharp.
Well done.
- Thank you, sir.
- Doug.
- Todd, I really like
the profile of your saber.
In the kill test, I really
enjoyed the way
your blade was designed
to thrust.
Did a lot of damage.
Good job.
- Thank you.
- All right, gentlemen,
you've both done fantastic work.
However, in this arena
of competition,
there can only be one
"Forged in Fire" champion.
[suspenseful music]
♪ ♪
Dave...
congratulations.
You are the "Forged in Fire"
champion.
Todd, your weapon
did not make the cut.
David will explain.
- Todd, what this eventually
came down to
was a construction problem
with your handle.
The tang was so small,
the handle almost round.
Nothing was fitted up
tightly.
So when I was
making the cuts,
it was incredibly hard
to control.
And because of that,
we're gonna have to let you go.
- Todd, please surrender
your weapon.
- I'm very proud of what
I've done.
To make a blade,
it doesn't matter
whether you've made 100
or 1,
things can happen at any time
just like life.
I'm just gonna move on,
you know, and do better
and continue to make what I make
and do what I do.
- Dave, congratulations.
You are the new
"Forged in Fire" champion
and will receive a check
for $10,000.
Good job.
- Thank you.
I'm in total shock
over this.
I don't think any of this
is gonna sink in
until my feet touch down
in Oklahoma again.
I'm a hobbyist against a bunch
of full-time bladesmiths.
I'm gonna be talking forever
about this.
I'm very happy and excited.
♪ ♪